Liju (LF), Ryan (RB), Mervi (MH), Gilberto (GF), Chris S (CS), Helen C (HC), Helen P (HP), Joe White (JW), Trish (TW)

=-=-=-=-=
Discussion of large_scale
Ryan - term was intended to know how much of the genome was examined
subjects - from Barry and this is not in our current Use Cases

Tina - amount of coverage of the genome examined

LF - use of property will fix the problem and allow the user to allow to choose if this is genome_wide or not, use Datatype property with a filler of boolean

CS - what becomes a type versus a property? e.g. 'strain or line' design vs genome wide

LF - def can be in property or in the value, when search engine looks at this then this can be searched

HP - this can't be implemented in current AE, neeeded now so if not agreement by all then need another solution. assumes that I have a local implementation of this search engine, which I don't - and no resources to build one either. So lets be pragmatic here

CS - policy and implemetation in apps, with MO we don't use properties to qualify the terms, but as some additional terms within the ontology
genome_wide seems like a type and keep property to qualify the type of the term
Chris suggest that application type stuff, - term annotation - rather than semantic content

LF - SPARQL can be used for this and is free
AA: Send out URL for SPARQL query engine

TW: with properties - if adds an adjective to the term, SNP/large scale - this is not an is-a then this could become a property


LF: "large" does follow is_a for a term like large_scale_SNP_design, it is not that it is an adjective that it is a problem

HP - large is subjective and will cause problems later, keep this simple

HC - genome_wide is complicated, can be ORF or the introns

CS - the scale is understood to be genome wide 
TB - we can specify in the def what this accounts for - ORFS or introns etc.

RB - currently genome_wide is the synomyn
ALL - prefer this as the term name

CS:genome wide scale is a scale

HP:do we mean genome wide - genomic - transcriptomic

LF - do we need to care about scale? scale is magnitude of something. scale of something is not dependent, need to be defined in relation to something that is independent

HC - define in proportion to the genome
LF - use to desc experiments?
JF - no, that is biology not technology
HP - this concept is used locally as an exp that examines either a pathway or genome_wide therefore this is biology
JF - genome_wide goes to what one is measuring and is part of experiment, 

TB - genome_wide is one particluar assay measures across the genome

TW - where would this term fit?
JF - assay
ALL - agree that assay is the parent

RB:will this be in design?
LF - prob need a diff relationship for this since it is not a is_a, 

TW:assay is under protocol application, under process

HC - it is an object
TW - assay is a process term
CS - all the type terms are nouns, terms need to be singular nouns

LF - genome_wide assay would be ok as a process
CS - a genome_wide assay is a subtype of assay unless there are other subtypes of things that are genome_wide then put it back under design...

LF - good point, think that we have assays across experiments - meta analysis of several studies, could be applied to studies. In that case the analysis would still be a process, and as such an assay.
JF - distinguish type of study

LF - leave as subclass of assay

DEFINE THE TERM
genome_wide_assay - see below

HP - can we put intent into an assay
RB - sounds like a purpose or objective

CS - a genome_wide_assay is one in which measurements are made across the genome

JF - others are enzymatic assay or microscopic assay - returns a number or an image
CS - can still do a genome_wide_assay using either

HP - nervous about terms defined on their output
HC - intent in definition? we have tried to deal with the idea of whats planned and what isn't protocolappl does include intended and unintended events 

LF - genome_wide is usually a fishing expedition? generate a hypothesis
HC - disagree with this
we had a discussion wih BS on 11 May - decided to avoided hypothesis

RB - genome_wide can be hypothesis generating or not, from our experience this seemed useful

HC - hypothesis generating - seems like this was too fuzzy
CS - I'd like to see hypothesis captured in the design and not label whether something is hypothesis generating or not

AA HC:I think we agreed, and I will post that to the tracker after

REMOVE FROM THE PROPOSAL
--scale                                                                          
---scale_involving_large_numbers_of_subjects                                     
---scale_involving_small_numbers_of_subjects 

--purpose -> add this as a synonym to objective

=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
JF and Tox Terms
the revised terms doesn't follow the data model and is split out by subject matter

things being discussed under design seem like they are factors

HP:these are subjective, so I suggest that these are hypotheses or purposes

TW:I was replacing stressor with factor. It is not the stressor and factor are the same thing, but the point is to identify those things that we know have been used as factors in a study and are terms that we want to include. The notion of the factor being a stressor or not can be discussed later if this is still needed.

HC- anything can be a factor so does this need to be explicitly stated?


JF - helpful to not list everything under design, rather see these factors


HP - if notion of stressor is built in the ontology then this is a problem, 
HC - what is a stressor in one organism is not in another 
CS - can these be viewed as subtype of a factor
JF - yes
JF - some of these are known to not cause stress

LF - view as a synonym?
CS - no, this is not true in all cases, e.g. tissue survey - these are not stressors

LF - can be an applied factor?
HP - things that I do or are inherent props of the organism
LF - is the factor the thing that is being looked at in the experiment? 
CS - use cases, i need to know if cells are treated with some cytokine does transcription increase, therefore want to pull back these experiments

HP - if it is a factor then it is a factor under study
JF - frequently there are a large number of variables in the exp and not all are important

HP - in CS example 
properties of the organism and things that are applied to the organism

JF - fish from different ponds
LF - group as environmental factor?

HC - if there is a chemical found naturally in the body and then applied, this is an application/treatment it would still be a 

RB - if the fish are in diff ponds then they are inherently being treated differently
LF - use exposure to something?
TB - diff is a naturally occuring thing versus actively doing something

LF - there are different env in a lab

HP - did we decide on subclasses of study_factor
--intrinsic
--environmental 
--treatment

TW - I prefer to list out all the factors of interest first and see what groups they form rather than identify the groups first. 

GF - some of these can be just params of the experiment and some can be factors, use properties to bring together

CS - is this necessary? create terms that are needed to capture something

GF - in one case you want to record param and in antoher it is the factor, link by a property to indicate the role

LF - cancer study - selenium supplement inhibits the growth, although can not use the ontology to put everything there

HC - factor is an intended variable
HP - GF is proposing a modeling decision and this is ok

HP:dose_effect/dose_factor - could be renamed - 
AA:TW to put this in the tracker

=-=-=-=-=
WORK FOR NEXT WEEK
-JF - send out a the factor terms as re-named and re-dinfed to fit with FuGO style
-HP, HC, TW - define and re-name the factor terms from the list sent by HP
-TW - post to tracker to re-name study_factor children


