Fugo Conf call
--------------

Trish, Jennifer, Tina, Liju, Joe, Mervi, Helen P, Helen C

one of the variables under examination in the study

Bjoern:

don't understand, study factors will duplicate all possible variables, can we have a property for all the factors.

Liju - agree will make the ontology very heavy

TW:where would the filler come from? should it be free text?

JF:need to distinguish all the minor and the major factors, we are listing an infinitely large no of terms. 

LF:two types of grouping, methodological, Jennifer was mentioning other factors - primary and secondary -  


HP:there are no minor factors by the definition we agreed on - there are factors and other things like sample properties where other things can be annotated

TW:don't we at some point need to list the factors that we have seen? 

LF:yes they are other places in the ontology

TW:e.g. environment - whether we would have duplicate it and environmental factor

TW:we do need to look into this, as we fill out the rest of the ontology we need to look at these duplications - we were trying to look at a discrete piece of this.

Bjoern:was proposing a property - has_factor - filler organism attribute - not an is-a 

LF:this would be solution, we don't do double parenting

HP:ok if we do that then do we have some volunteers to do that?

TW:do we want depth or breadth right now?

HC:sometimes you need to specify what the factors are in detail, for e.g. the time points, for a time course

LF:that would make a use case for these to exist in the ontology

HC:study - under cardinal part of design, one of the terms is study factor, and study report, - conclusion, final transformation, design_specification - the classification of the terms we suggested - doesn't fit very well with the various types of container classes that we discussed.

HP:seems like we are facing a design decision here, factors all included directly, or as properties. So we should explore the pros and cons of both possibilities.

CS:we will put the current approach of factors on hold, and now we will go to BioMaterial.

HP:are these defined, we need something to go on

CS:minimum requirement - we need definitions.

HC:concern that we will fill the ontology with terms that exist in multiple places


AA: Liju, Jennifer, Helen P, Trish and Joe will split the existing proposed
terms for children of study_factor and identify where these terms can exist on
it's own as a term in the ontology. This may require proposing additional
classes and subclasses. These terms can then be indicated that they can be a
factor of the study by using a property.










