OBI Developers Call - 11/01/06


Agenda: Review the examples of how to code synonyms in OWL so that the provenance of the term can be captured

Participants: Daniel Schober (DS), Trish Whetzel (TW), Mervi Heiskanen (MH), Allyson Listor (AL), Allan Ruttenberg (AR), Kevin Clancey (KC), Ryan Brinkman (RB), Liju Fan (LF), Helen Parkinson (HP), Gilberto Fragoso (GF), Jennnifer Fostel (JF), Tina Boussard (TB)
=-=-=-=

Synonym discussion.

GF, Alan, Liju coded examples of methods to code synonyms
-Liju has provided and e.g using a subproperty for synonyms
-GF provided an example using a qualifier
-Allan provided an example using slots


Subproperty example from Liju:
-------------------------------
Created spatiotemporal interval as an e.g. of one class, in a small ontology. Created properties, annotation_property, Protege/OWL 311 has types for annotation property - object/datatype - using data type here.
File location: http://fugo.sf.net/downloads, file subproperty2.owl

Subproperty created e.g. if synonym is for the Tox community:
Can create as many subprop as like, are all synonyms

Domain: OWL thing, range is any for now, could be string. We could create sub-sub annotation properties too. 

Added a potential synonym for Tox community='time interval' which is the term equivalent to spatio-temporal interval

Not sure how we treat all synonyms, will they use the OBI preferred terms, or their own synonyms?

TW:we might want to have a more user friendly term as the OBI synonym


LF:easy to use, can look in class editor there's a page that you can add an annotation value. All properties are listed and can choose e.g OWL/Tox-OWL term 

TW:downsides

1. How many Tox synonym term labels would there be, is the 'parent' synonym term value ever filled in? 

LF:each community can add an owl term in the ontology, all obi terms can have the annotation property - but not all might be used.

TW:another point, ask is an issue if some there are multiple synonyms?

LF:sub-annotation properties make the file OWL-Full, if we don't need the sub-properties not need owl full.

LF:Protege has a way to check if things are OWL full
Once has sub-properties of annotation properties=owl full

TW:is it a bad thing that if the ontology is OWL full for this reason?

LF:we want to the use the reasoner

GF:in this case, it won't matter too much since these are annotation properties, no need to worry
LF:we can do some testing

LF:we could use Properties instead of sub properties, would get a long flat list


GF:when alternate term properties are created it affects the API for Enterprise Vocabulary Service at the NCI and we would need to modify it and there's a maintenance issue. Could happen on a daily basis if we go this route. Results in extra work.

Alan:Would we have an API that takes the name of a property as an argument? Get the slot value that way

GF:possible for people that have knowledge of the term, but there are cases in NCI we provide vocabularies for different purposes and we don't necessarily know a lot about the ontology. Property 1/2/3 are all terms, and then have a generic way to provide these. That complicates things.

Alan:Case concerned about is want an API to query for all terms. Ask for value of the top level property

TW:possible some ways around this, though there could be a work around. Expensive in developer time.


Qualifier example from Gilberto
------------------
GF: Demo, two different examples in the qualifier.owl file
File location: http://fugo.sf.net/downloads, file qualified.owl

Terms from different commmunities use single annotation property, have qualifier value instead for difft communities. 

use 'complex term' in this case. 

Allyson:is the value section supposed to be human readable?
Daniel:what are the following for:
PT - is for preferred term
SY is for synonym etc


Indication of provenance of term, e.g. PSI etc is possible,
Disadvantage, not OWL full, is a hack. For the time being not supported directly in Protege, can get ugly tags.

TW:what makes this synonym vs preferred term?
GF:Snomed doesn't have snynoynms, just indicated preferred terms, so I used preferred term. NCI does have multiple term types, just used synonym here to show something other than a PT, could have been a complex term that's a PT from NCI

LF:how to query all NCI terms?  can't go via NCI term, I need to write a script
Alan:need regexp for this
LF:good to have source and type attached to terms but if end user is not familiar could be confused
GF:when comes to browser etc present in a better way
LF:so we need special presentation, protege can't do this
Allyson: this adds more work
LF:nice to have these all together presented

TW:looked like might be prone to human error  since none of terms are controlled need to type source etc.
GF:we have a plugin for complex values, can demo it if interested if we decide to pursue this.
TW:when will that be available with property. 
GF:we will change to protege in January, final testing before then.
TW:so close then
GF:yes

TW:quick and dirty OWL doc view of ComplexType- not bad.
Was better than expected.
GF:wonder why piped between fields 1:2 not 2:3 - curious
Alan:illustrates cons, looking for syntax error not good


Slot exmaple from Alan:
------------------------
Alan:
Same info that GF showed, doing in OWL direct not using strings for values. Each is then an instance and then can add extra info.
In my case association of a term used for, where they came from.
Look at 2 views, class tree and wiki page

File location: http://fugo.sf.net/downloads, names.owl AND names-classtree.png

Ontology is something like OWL abstract syntax, not looked at in protege. When I see that protege can't display name, go to protege developers and get it fixed. Not designing a representation to fix the tool. To query terms use SPARQL

Looking at the png

Get 2 instances that have a name.
Uses for the name is embedded, OBI, BioPax etc. Might be used WRT to another ontology
Sources of names also possible, paper,db etc

Switch in OWL, can also view in protege

Name some properties that link a name to where it's from and what used for.
May not know what is used for, so no cardinality constraint on this

Source e.g. name of database, name of application, private communication. Not exhaustive or required, just egs of what can do.

Restrictions on what said earlier; if paper, expect a pubmed id and title, application expects appliction name

Looking at examples

At the bottom, two names, class spatiotemporal_interval, annotation property - object, has name and label which is the type. Main thing get an association between use and name

Second e.g. time_interval / temporal_interval
How do we get these terms out for an API?
Using SPARQL, looking at standard API developed for ontologies. In biopax, we are talking about custom vs semantic web tools. I am in favor of semantic tools for maintenance. Using SPARQL queries with 'fill in the blanks' API looks up the query, add the variable component.

Need a URL for SPARQL.
Explanation of using SPARQL.

TW:Flip back to protege view:
Alan:this version if protege is munging name spaces, is now fixed in next release.
TW:In here where do the bits of info go?
Alan:E.g. properties tab, there's the named property
Protege has made a choice, in OWL annotation property are not further subtyped. This made OWL-full in Liju's example
Source leads to an instance etc. 
Name would also be an instance, but can't have an object property
Used for is also an instance, as is source.
These are all labels so if look at RDFS label, can view that way too.
If click on spatiotemporal_interval, annotation property points to these two instances, protege has these wrong as it's calling them data type properties not annotation type properties

Could ask Matt Horridge to develop a better way to input these. 
My tool is open source.

GF:Alan, could you go through the process of adding a new term to the graph?
Alan:in protege? will be clumsy since i usually write this in text form and don't use GUI
GF:yes.

HP:could you do an explanation in protege and email it?
TW:like the way to capture the info, however concerned about the editing environment since this seems complicated to implement. 

TW:any other comments

JF:was very helpful.

Action Item - All: summary of pros and cons of all three examples for next week

Take a look at the different docs e.g. docs from Daniel

1. Bigger picture
2. Community practices, what do people want to have vs what could be done?

Discuss this by email, in meta data/syntactic/interoperability etc

JF:where is it on the wiki? 
TW:look at meta data link on homepage - there's community practices doc.


 








