Minutes - 08/09/06

Particpants: Ryan Brinkman (RB), Helen Causton (HC), Jennifer Fostel (JF), Chris Stoeckert (CS), Richard Scheuermann (RS), Joe White (JW), Gilberto Fragoso (GF), Liju Fan (LF), Trish Whetzel (TW), Bill Bug (BB), Tina Boussard-Hernandez (TB)

Agenda:
-Discuss project structure, document proposed by Chris T (All)
-Discuss project name change (All)
-Is further clean-up of the OWL file needed before posting, e.g. update version, release date, term identifiers (Class versus OBI versus FuGO? (All)


=-=-=-=
-Discuss project structure, document proposed by Chris T (All)
Summary from CS:
role of the CC, so far has been a bit fuzzy with things that belong in the development group. focus on workshops, presentations, community outreach, but not necessarily ontology development.

BB - other communities are interested in the work of FuGO, clinical trials, bioimaging. there are other groups working on this layer - EXPO, ExperiBASE

CS - some confusion as to when advisors are wearing a development hat and when serving as an advisor. developers group basically the same.

TW - there were 2 groups Core Developers and General Developers, is this needed?

JW - should the people that maintain the web etc. be part of the CC group?
CS - diff perspective

RS - another role of CC was fund raising

TB - timeline for approval - by next Coord call

-Discuss project name change (All)
BB - address this generic layer of an investigation and then the domains (technological/biological) would remain as extensions of this work

RS - reference ontologies and application ontologies, FuGO might fit into an application ontology

BB - breaking it into these compartments is important
CS - the plan was not to have layers, the ontology would be the ontology and the communities would contribute to. falls a bit more into the category of applications. work on 1 ontology that all people can contribute to.

BB - we are not building into a data model
CS - build into a single ontology so there aren't conflicts. whatever people do with it from there is up to them. goes back to the notion of a reference ontology.

BB - doesn't mean that you are splitting the view of the world, split the management 

RS - example of something that is specific to BIRN but does not fit into an investigation, is this the instance?

BB - there isn't anything that should be outside the boundary of OBI/FuGO. aspects of func inves representation that don't nec overlap by others

RS - diff view of the same world,OBI is the world and FuGO is the domain

TW - pull out slides from MGED8 meeting
Action item - send these slides

BB - the structure effects the mangagement, funding etc.

BB - summarize on the wiki. do you envision microsrcopes to be in OBI - YES

RS - data processing is another type of protocol application

JF - new name, Investigations in the Life Sciences (OILS), 
CS - this has been used

RS - hear all the names and then decide
RB - semantic web is using life sciences
RS - vote to use biomedical, 
BB - second this

TB - wait to see the slides before voting on the scope change

-Is further clean-up of the OWL file needed before posting, e.g. update version, release date, term identifiers (Class versus OBI versus FuGO? (All)

-TW - propose to change to FuGO_ etc.
update version, release date
push to dicusss at next week's call

-Planning for next meeting: San Diego January / February 2007?
BP - there is room to have the meeting
CS - motion for straw vote to have next meeting in San Diego, JF - abstain from voting, others on call are in agreement
TW - what needs to happen next?
CS - GF and BP provide proposals 

CS - propose another straw vote around October/early November for attend?
5 yes, 3 no, 2 abstain
(BP - in favor, but will not be able to attend)

BB - would each meeting cover diff things? such as in the last workshop

CS - since both are straw votes, this tells us that there is a strong interest for San Diego, and mixed interest for DC
Discuss further through email and vote at next call
GF - Action item will send draft to check

