Fugo call 7 June 2006, .
----------------------
Trish, Daniel, Philippe, Liju, Helen P, Joe W., Mervi, Ryan,Jennifer.

Discussion of SVN vs CVS - SVN has been turned on, but the project has not been moved yet. After checking with Support from Trish Sourceforge, they recommend to fix the directory structure in the CVS archive and then migrate this to SVN using scripts that Sourceforge provides. After migrating the project and checking that all is Ok, flag CVS as disabled and submit a ticket to Sourceforge to request the removal of the CVS content.

PRS:CVS is running again, and wants the OWL file to be posted there. 

AA:Trish will update the FuGO file with the latest approved changes posted to the tracker and commit to CVS.

TW: Process of file changes should be that the tracker is used as a mechanism for things that are going to end up in the ontology. Also, use the tracker to modify existing proposals or to propose modifications to items in the ontology.

TW: Is CVS working in that we can commit back to the cvs - haven't evaluated whether this has changed.
DS: Yes, was able to check out project.

AA. Trish will commit the file and will add the latest tracker items, will notify us by email when that's done.


Discussion on roles vs factors and how they should be used in the ontology.

Jennifer - like the idea of Factor as a Role

Discussion of Role - is this a place to add Factors. Is Factor=Perturbation Role. 

HP:simply replace Role, with Factor then. Yes

LF:we have factor as a class, from there we have characteristics etc. 

TW:environmental example please

JF:fish in pond a vs pond b - is now a factor as comparing these.

TW:I meant ontology specific, using Subject-Predicate-Object triples to explain.

Some discussion on if we do a factor approach and where things exist in other places and will live there not as a factor alone.

has-role, Factor - this doesn't list all factors, just decide what the propety is attached to, study design has_factor or Philippe's proposal  - thing has_role Factor.

LF:we are talking about two relationships, one is the the inverse of the other.
Factor to Role, Characteristics to Factor  we can have both in fact.

TW:we discussed a study design has a link to factor- do we still want that

JF/HP: yes

TW:if we look at env - has_role factor - 

LF:has_role is not great relationship

TW:yes we need to refine this relationship

TW:role and study design have no relationship now, we will need to add this role.

StudyDesign has_factor and filler can be anything.

JF:seems that has_factor is a 'characteristic' of a study design, some don't have factors where they are longitudinal

TW:I don't think that you are using characteristic in the same way

JF:we'd need to move study design for this

LF:characteristics are dependent so must be assoc with something.

TW:this is a circular disc, factor wants an assn to a Factor. 

AA:Liju - take the file as is, and use environment as a factor and try it in both ways, study design has_factor env is factor etc.


LF:would even be better as a graph
TW:if you could do in protege so we can open it, good also as a graph


LF:like to say that we are modelling investigation/studies, we don't want to go into the biology domain. We might cross the border to modelling of biology domain.

PRS:discussion on scope is an agenda item for FuGO meeting, all agree?

TW:I agree that we need to discuss this. BS will explain more about the clinical trial ontology at Coordinators call.

HP:is this part of the clinical trials workspace?

JF:ARC - is a datamodel of interest, possible source of terms for fugo.

Back to the discussion on where other things belong in the ontology.
List was circulated, terms to go through to see if we agree locations

ArrayDesign - proposed to be under design

RB:can we abstract that, e.g. 
TechnologyDesign
	PlatformDesign
		ArrayDesign, etc
StudyDesign is a sibling of technology design.

JW:Design was supposed to be the parent.

HP:I think that's a reasonable suggestion.

AA:for Ryan to put that in the tracker with definitions - TechnologyDesign and PlatformDesign
AA:JW to do ArrayDesign in the tracker and new terms that are also on the list.

ArrayPlatform - this was a technology - this is under Array.

JF:also under study design would be how used the arrays, e.g. reference design.
This is part of study design and doesn't belong here.

LF:Array is a technology, can technology be an object?

TB:Shouldn't array go under technology design?

ArrayPlatform = MicroarrayPlatform, change array to microarray

MH:Imagene, is this the sw or a platform?
JW:is the platform, is a newer platform.
JF:We can have a bead based system, and also add illumina.
LF:if this is a technology then the definition isn't good.
TB:we also use these for polymorphism
JF:this is the thing used to make that technology

AA: Jennifer to add these to the tracker, new class:BeadBasedPlatform of which imagene etc will be kids.

PRS:re tracker, should we input agreed things via tracker or all?

MH:where to we put protein arrays etc?

We can also add: tissue array, celllysate array protein array, antibody array?
AA:MH and JF to collaborate on these

TW:if we need consensus, then send out a list.

HP:tracker can be used even where contentious, so that we get a record of this.

TW:one item per tracker ticket please

JF:wants to set up a time for tracker training, 3.30 EST 12.30 for Tina. 

AA:MH will sent up a centra and Trish will login at 3pm EST and will be promoted.

JF:we had a long list of factors, we were looking at Joe today, all of my terms are in bold, now, and all terms in current ontology are intalics, I have proposed intermediate text. I am not nec proposing that all these terms will make the ontology.

AA:TW etc will look at the mail Jennifer sent and forward to the list by Friday.

PRS:can you send this to me? Will be forwarded to list.

Can people stay extra time? 

data transformation

PRS - it's a process

HP:this is a process - the application of a protocol

JW:I think of it as a protocol, e.g. log transformation - 

HP:a template for doing a process?

LF:protocols and applications of protocols are separate, so we want both.

JW:but then we have two terms, very similar

LF:reminds of the factor problem

PRS:if we had more properties we could sort this out

JW:if you want to specify used a log transform - which term would I choose? I would pick the protocol?

PRS:a tool that is using the ontology - these two things can be linked in some way, both terms should come up together.

PRS:is this an implemenatation problem

TW:there is an e.g. with protocol

AA:PRS/JW ask on dev list about this

LF:comment, in biology biologists used the protocol more than the process itself, we could then favour protocols vs protocol applications.

We like the idea of protocols rather than processes. We would like to model therefore in a way that can be applied

TW:we don't then need to specify the protocol applications
Do all processes have protocols?
HP: I think all experimental proceseses have protocols

JW:classifier assessment -> classifier assessment protocol, also under protocol

TW:where does it belong?

PRS:I would like to keep this with protocol.

We agree to keep these under protocol.

DS:don't forget to check the definitions of these.

AA:DS to check these defs, once JW puts these in the tracker

spiked_in_control, Joe created a class called control - 

HP:control is interesting  - as one persons control not anothers

LF:like the position

is control a role?

PRS:the purpose of this is to be a control

HP:function and role seem like the same thing

PRS:function  blender - blends, but also could be a paper weight

HP:do we care more about role than function?

TW:do you vote for role or function?

PRS:function?

When you plan an array design, you design sequences for qc of array

JW:lets define role and function and then decide what it is.

JW:do we agree that there can be a class control under realisable enduring entity?

TW:or under function or role?

PRS:ok got a sequence that is meant to be a control, but this doesn't function as such is instead a langing light. Then is two different things?

JW:we use At clones on human and mouse arrays, are experimental in At array.

TB:what if you are just mining the data, might use it as a non control. It's subjective.

HP:sounds like is context dependent then like role

LF:function/role - tightly associated. forcing a separation is hard.

LF:Role is about operator etc. Function is more about biological process

PRS:maybe function is not useful.

RB:is there a sequence of metabolites? relates to the definition?

JW:no, I missed that when I did the definition.

RB:remove metabolites from definition and/or add fluor beads for technology platform.

HP:can we leave where it is for now and revisit later

AA:Joe to add to tracker


--END--




































