FuGO Developers Call - August 8, 2006Please note the summary of definitions worked on today is at the bottom.Participants: Daniel Schober, Gilberto Fragoso, Jen Fostel, Mervi Heiskanen, Trish Whetzel, Allyson Lister, Ryan Brinkman, Liju, Helen C, Bjoern PetersGENERAL NOTES1. TW asked if there was anything else to do wit respect (wrt) to Robert's demo last week.a. For Bjorn everything is OK wrt Robert et al's demo last week. Suggestion is to move on to working on the OWL file.b. Liju says Robert didn't discuss the cardinality - should cardinality be kept on db side rather than ontology side? She thinks that originally, the decision was not to deal with cardinality.i. TW suggests that we add that as another topic for another day for the developer's list.2. Ryan had a problem mentioned with owl file sent today - one solution was to copy out the XML bits of the owl file and put that in an existing owl file.a. TW has put fixed version on sourceforge page in the download area, but the site seems to be down.ONTOLOGY DISCUSSION1. Liju suggested using a classifier to help us determine if the model is correct.2. TW suggests starting by look at independent continuant branch.3. Collection of physical entities -> population. TW asked if there were other examples of such collections?a. Sample population and populationi. Bjorn suggested sample, as a collection of specimens. Jen thinks we shouldn't use sample, as it is used differently by different domains. She suggests population sample instead, but then you need to clarify the def: is a population of fish just the ones you have, or something you can never get (Bjorn), as that would be ALL of a species. The 15 fish you have in your tank are your "sample population" as a specific instance/subset of the population you're studying. ii. Bjorn mentioned he added specimen and sample population in the tracker a couple of months ago, where you could get the definitions from.iii. Once we've drawn the "samples", we end up with a sample population. What is a study population? Liju and Jen say that a sample population is drawn from your larger study population.iv. It is important to remember that study_* are already in the deleted objects because we didn't want to duplicate everything with study_ prefixed to it. Everyone agrees that sample population is important. We are JUST trying to distinguish between the sample of a population and the entire population.v. It is agreed that population and sample population should be siblings, as it is not a direct is_a relationship.vi. One suggestion was to use "derived_from" from the relationship ontology to describe sample population -> population, whereas alternatively "drawn from" is a sampling in the statistical sense. "Drawn from" describes our situation better. Liju suggested "Selected from" as it is a better description, and everyone agreed.vii. We can have populations that do NOT have samples drawn from it, so don't include anything about sample-taking in the definition.b. Possible additional term is pooled specimens, for when a sample population is "all ground up". A possible example of this is the bucket from the Sargasso sea, where the assay is done on the collection of organisms, not one specific organism. This would be a child of sample_population, as it can contain multiple sample_populations gathered from a single population. Not sure where the plurality should be in the term name: pool of specimen, or pool of specimens?c. Jen thinks Philippe is the person most advocating for clinical studies as another ontology term?4. TW would like people to volunteer to take a couple of terms and define them before next week. Trish will put blocks of terms up on the wiki and then people can sign up to these blocks. 5. Another suggestion was to get working groups to do the remaining top-level terms.DEFINITIONS:Sample population: [this phrase was controversial with some: Collection of physical entities] A sample_population is a group of objects that is selected from a population, e.g. the fish in the net that were sampled from the lake, the people that responded to the call for volunteers.Population: The entire collection of objects with a particular set of common characteristics, e.g. the individual fish of a species in a lake, the people in the state of Utah. Rem1: collection somehow always involves a selection processPool of specimens: a set of specimens which have been gathered from from one or more sample populations (all come from the same population?), obtained by the physical process of mixing of individual specimens, e.g. mixing the dna collected from the individual fish.