FuGO Call - 12/21/05

Chris S, Liju, Barry, Helen P, Mervi, Trish, Jennifer, Helen C
--------------------------------------------------------------
reviewing the ideas for upper level ontologyTT = TerminologyType 

InvestigationTT - experiment, assays etc
MaterialTT - compounds, biomaterials etc
ProtocolTT - 
DataTT
InstrumentationTT
TechnologyTT
DocTT

CS:Step back and give context, idea cf GO - has 3 top classes that organise component, process, etc. Independent set of terms that are species independent. Parallel here, terms that fall into classes that domain need to create assn to these to experiments in analag. way to GO. Difference is that GO classes are indep. but here we may need reln cn materials and data etc.

Given this, 1 mission is to create an org list of terms that fall into these top level categories, rather than create an ontology that reflects what an expt is we create ontology of terms that are used in experiments, a la MO. From the FuGO workshop


LF we also have contact in MO
CS:we can add or change these, but is this a way to go?
What are the alternatives?
LF:will these be disjoint?
CS:agree, doesn't change the proposal , just need to ensure this.
LF:If we make all disjiont now then we will need to redo the whole thing later, there's an overhead
JF:how distinguish instrumentation and technology
CS:technol = mass spec vs microarray. Instrumentation , this is a scanner etc.
JF:instrumentation may be a sub class of technology
CS:could be, not definitive. But do we want to start here?
JF:what is documentation?
CS:where contact etc, may go?
LF:can we give a def for each top node?
TW:Barry, whatcha think?
BS:GO is badly named, whatever you do name it sensibly, this doesn't sound like FuGO - sounds like ontology of experiments and devices, may need to change the name
CS:yes, doing a terminology used to annotate fg expts
BS:this is more than a terminology, is an ontology of those things refered to when describing experiments, is in the domain of FG expts. Are you only int. in things inside experiments - 
CS/TW:agree
BS:then is the Functional Genomics Experiment Ontology?
HC:is everything inside experiment really e.g. biosamples,  clinical history?
CS:limitations are useful, we can still describe these things, useful to spec. the context
BS:another error of GO - is 3 sep ontologies with no relns defined between them. Avoid this, GO has a good design choice on the disjointness. Choose so that can define reln between them in a coherent way. Suspect that you are close enough to that, data, doc and protocol may overlap, may be overkill for these three things. Instrumentation and Technology may also overlap.
CS:so next we need to assess what is disjoint and try and merge these so that we don't get into problems later. Propose use these as a start point try to create a set of disjoint upper level classes that are defined to establish that they are really disjoint. Qu for BS. Should we generated text def and attributes, and then follow GO in that dis cn processes and devices and materials that undergo processes.

We agree that we can attempt to define these things.
JF:See three top level classes - doc, (incl data, people, info about study,) Protocol (inlc instrument, assay, process),Design  factors, biomaterials related and handled.
 TW:do we want to incl design and assay relns
JF:I include design time, groups, assays and materials
HP:protocol may equal process, and having assays sep is not a clean split
CS:FuGE has protocols inputs and outputs, could use as a property - may be a disjoint attribute.
JF:is technology an input?
BS:if you have material, clear what that term subsumed, kinds, that have names, get an ontology of that easily. technology is an abstract term, no clear kids subsumed. This device is not a technology, this experiment is an experiment, instrument and document etc all of the wrong part of speech to generate the kind of is-a that's needed. E.g. document, device, etc. Documents are not parts of experiments, they are reports about experimemts, journals, data etc.
CS:this is the problem with documentation, is not doc per se, but is attribution.
BS:an ontology shouldn't contain the names of individuals like companies, was bad in MO.If you assert who carried out the experiment don't want their name - want term. Ontology should not capture.
HP:Affy cel file format e.g. - we need this specific term  - is needed here, and will get that specific:
CS:so we have a clash here, Barry is correct, but we need these terms, thought?
BS:All hard problems, generally speaking, ontologies incl. names for individuals had to satisfy cases where need interop, reason, what sorts of relns are in the ontolgy. If have only general types, if have instances need a difft type of linking, often use the same word then these are difference
LF:how granular can a concept be?
BS:no limits on this
LF:e.g. experiments often repeated and each experiment will be an individual
CS:yes each expt is an individual - not part of the ontology
CS:what's recommendation for managing the terms that people need, Affymetrix cel file format? e.g.
BS:If this is used as general term even tho has company in the name is safe to treat it as a general term. Incl. a list of companies is a problem.
CS:we can manage this, proteomics need names of different instruments - can we apply this generalisation saefyky Eg. ABI 377 sequencer - has many copies
HP:could we set these up a database of these
CS/TW is a difft question, we need to discuss that too.
CS:one thought had - poss not practical - capture most of what we wanted without using instances - if needed for some communities could create instances for some classes that allow some enumeration, not nec in ontology itself but external
BS:that's the correct solution
TW:back to these top level containers - 
CS:we have a general idea as to what we need to do

We will start with these top level classes and when we get to stuff that cannot be gen. then these will be enumerated and handled in a different way

CS:how do we refer to existing resources such as ontologies?
BS:what kinds of things?
cS:e.g. NCBI taxonomy
LF:in context of e.g. Materials.
TW:does FUGO want to include relns to other ontologies
CS:3 ways to handle - BioMaterial comes from yeast - keep term in MO, not try to capture, or what we do now in MO is here's an organism and can be described by some other resources
BS:purpose of this ontology should be that others are developing ontologies and no need to repeat that work , the more that can appeal to external ontologies the better, if there are ontologies use them. Choose the node in the ontology of org types as you can, get all info of external parent terms. 
CS:how should that work?
E/g FMA - have a mouse, some tissue, want some term from FMA?
BS:that's a problem as this is a human anatomy
LF:of the three approaches, we can direct the user to the external ontology - already, some tax e.g. FMA need to pay to use this, not available to all.
CS:this was just an e.g. - we do need to get criteria for this? But how do we refer to external resources
BS:BioMaterial - often with some organism, need a std name for type of organism, and also a ref to body part - idea is that whole experiment not a single term but an ordered tuple from each of the 6 facets
CS:even more than that, in MO one uses 100 terms drawing from difft parts of the ontology
TW:terms from experiment design type, factors, organism, actions within a protocol
CS:staying within a biomaterial, we have a class BioMaterialCharacteristics
BS:1. you;ve got a good terminology for describing experiments, need a list of 50 most imp terms  - might become clearer what the top level terms
2.You descibed facets in regard to biomaterial, if you can give static ontology of the facets in general
e.g/ 6 facets for biomaterial  - what are the building blocks of an experiment
CS:assumes that there is a cannonical expt - not true for any technology is very species specific - e.g. yeast vs human
BS:can you build an ontology whose top level term is experiment  - and child term and assn with each type is a template - for each slot you have compulsory ontology term that is assn to kind of material used
TW:wonder if we make a starting point with the MIAME and MIAPE guidelines
CS:those provide a starting point, but we need to go beyond these
BS:for each expt may be a 100 plus terms, is this an unstructured list
CS:no there are OMs that are out there that need a term and we need to provide them
We are thinking of providing something analagous for any document
BS:this is good, so produce the 50 ,most imp terms, see how they organise and see how they organise, and find out what relns hold together, mainly is-a and part of, if you need more use ones that othes are using, get interop.
BS:relns ontology is being expanded, e.g. proteomics relns, where they can be coherently defined
CS:we can imagine asking each community what are the 50 most important terms
HP:we've done that for MO
TW:need to have the community then to come up with the 50 most important terms will be imp for next conf call.
TW:thanks to Barry and everyone else
Next call Jan 4th, 11 am EST, 4 pm GMT, and id overlap.





 

