Oct. 17, 2007 OBI-developers call
Attending: Melanie C., Liju F., Jennifer F., Gilberto F., Daniel S., Ryan B., Tina B., Chris S.

Agenda: Minimal Metadata
https://wiki.cbil.upenn.edu/obiwiki/index.php/MinimalMetadata

Minimal Metadata properties were revisited as providing these for public release is ongoing and we do not want to make their provision a barrier.

Preferred_term. Needed for public release. The definition of this property has been updated (see the wiki). Implementation includes a note on "Functional property." Liju will investigate proper usage of this designatin and report back.

Definition: Needed for public release.

Definition_editor: Needed for public release. For expediency, can simply be the OBI Branch providing the definition. Note, that multiple branches (e.g, Instrument Branch, Relations Branch) can be listed. 

Definition_source: Needed for public release. For expediency, can simply be OBI. Note, that if the definition is largely taken from a book, an on-line source, etc., these should be used instead.

Curation_status: Currently not for public release. Will ask Bill Bug to report on how BIRNLex is managing these. At issue is the desire to only release "curation_complete" terms yet may have significant gaps in the ontology if don't provide (superclass) terms in draft stage.

Example: Desired for public release. Moved from mandatory to optional. Although essential for high level terms, examples for low level terms (e.g., Affymetrix HU133 array) are not.

Alternative_term: Desired for public release. While optional, it is likely that alternative terms will be the ones that most communities see and use. Therefore, it will be important to not alienate communities with only preferred terms but to also show them community-based alternative terms. Gilberto will look into full synonym usage of the NCI Thesaurus  for guidance to OBI. 

Alternative_term_tag. Desired for public release. Optional but needed to provide context for alternative term. Should be drawn from a controlled vocabulary and associated with an OBI community. 

Other metadata properties were not discussed nor considered necessary for public release. 
