FuGO Developers Conference Call - July 5, 2006Agenda:Review Instrument terms from BIRN project and from PSI-MS (mass spec)Attendees: Liju Fan (LF), Mervi Heiskanen (MH), Gilberto Fragoso (GF), Joe White (JW), Chris Stoeckert (CS), Bill Bug (BB), Trish Whetzel (TW)=-=-=-=-=Review of PSI-MS controlled vocabulary, version 1.7.2http://psidev.sourceforge.net/ms/xml/mzdata/psi_ont_1.7.2.oboTW - this work is not being presented in the format as requested, tab-delimited file containing the term name and definition, due to time constraints to generate term names and definitions that follow the ontology best practices that the FuGO project is following. The aim of presenting the work in it's current state is to allow the FuGO Working Group members to see the terms that are currently in this resource and to get feedback as to terms that look problematic with respect to the term name or definition so that this can be addressed before being presented for incorporation into FuGO.GF - Analyzer Type, time-of-flight, need better term names to indicate that these are kinds of instrumentsTW - none of the current definitions for the PSI-MS terms are in the agreed upon Aristotelian format. There may be an issue with modifying definitions due to the fact that some terms are 'owned' by ASMS, but that needs to be confirmed with Randy Julian who chairs this Working Group of PSI.CS/TW - Perhaps the changes/updates to the definitions can be fed back to ASMS so that they can be incorporated in their resource.LF - make sure that all child terms for a given parent actually are childrenLF/GF - Detector Type, some terms look like they are have a part_of rather than an is_a relationship, e.g. Electron Multiplier TubeTW - another example, Total Current does not seem to have the proper parent termLF - Model, link to the kind of Instrument would be useful. Same for Vendor terms.TW - yes, this is an item to address in FuGOJW - Vendor/Model, are these supposed to be in an ontology?LF - no, these terms shouldn't be in an ontology since this is an instanceCS - disagree, if the serial number were included then it would be an instance, but this isn't the case. QUESTION: How would the combination of the PSI-Ms terms for Vendor and Model effect the annotation of data? Is this something that could be done in FuGO and not adversely effect the usage for the needs of PSI?JW - Is there a specific machine for these techniques? Often times these can be put together.Action Item - FuGO Developers - model how an instrument term can be linked to the process in which it participates.TW - Inlet Type, Flow Injection AnalysisLF/JW - better to drop Analysis from the term nameBB - key is what exists, merge terms together for use by a community. Lean heavily on combining development results from FuGO and PATO.LF - other products exist for federated ontologiesBB - for an implementation, importing a given ontology fixes the work in time to a given versionLF - Action Item - send URL for additional ontology editorsTW - anyone familiar with the BioDash project from Eric Neumann?BB - working on some ideas, have not heard of this=-=-=-=-=Review of terms from BIRNLexBB - this work started with UMLS terms with an effort to extend them where needed, however this method did not work well. When re-vamping, decided to use the NCBO approach, for this work FuGO has been imported. This section of the work has had the least review by members of the BIRN group. This is evident in the inconsistencies in granularity and shape.The area of this work that relates to FuGO is the section that deals with light (absorbance and fluorescence) microscopy. Generally speaking devices, assays, and reagents.For example, Tissue Preparation. BIRN has included a few terms, but needs to bring in other term from other ontologies, e.g. ChEBI. Also Flybase has done work but this doesn't follow the OBO guidelines.There is a need for a mechanism to obtain a dynamic and current view of ontologies for use by other groups.BIRN will look toward FuGO and PATO for Unit terms. The current resources a more of a lexical resource than an ontology. Currently the BIRN group is working on having good definitions for terms.LF - Assessment definition?BB - try to avoid the definition so as not to constrain the use of this term. Assessment and assay are similar but are not synonyms.GF - note that the NCI Thesaurus has mechanisms to incorporate synonyms, etc. such as using datatype properties in OWL to indicate the preferred name and any synonyms that exist for the term, given that the term identifier is an alphanumeric string.BB - ontologies vary in their use of alphanumeric identifiers versus a human readable string name.TW - use of community specific synonyms in FuGO, via datatype annotation properties.BB - Assessment is not a synonym of Assay, prefer that to have this as a subclassLF - Assessment - observational or measuredBB - use a specific measure of the Assessment, has an input and an output. Important to characterize the medical history. Goes beyond measuring for a specific test.GF - structure looks really good. Comment on import - used to build an ontology versus use of terminology server to display the terms to a user.BB - view this as need for 3 kinds of tools:1) to build and curate ontology2) for annotating data3) for searching data annotated with an ontologyThis is important for NCBO to address.LF - OBO-Edit not as powerful as Protege/OWL.BB - yes this is true, but OBO-Edit does allow wholesale changes in structure rather easily.