FuGO Call 4 Jan 2006
--------------------

Note: next week coord call

Participants: Chris S, Jenn, HC HP, Ryan, Susanna, Philippe, Mervi, Chris t, Tina B, Barry Smith, Liju Fan

Agenda:
1. recap last call decisions

2. review proposed top level classes

TW review decisions

Top level hierarchies - sep and linked between them a la GO
Idea from BS - FuGO will be an ontology of descriptors for functional genomics experiments. 

CT:workflow is the job of a data model and not the ontology, agree
Comments on Chris's list to add

TW:check with the RSBI people, are there more concerns about capturing methodology? On board with this structure?

SS:how much will impact on the design of the mo rather than classify like and experiment is performed? What will be the pros and cons?

TW:will not lose power for descriptors by taking this route

Other groups want biologists view - personally think the app should present these terms

CT:can’t address question from here, we can look at atomic or terms as phrases, could still go different ways, hard to say? Is open at the moment?

TW:not being prescriptive

CT:phrases that are needed should be in there and these can be reassembled

CS:yes and this is what Barry suggested that we suggest the top terms we want and the top level containers are anchor points for this discussion

tw:top level classes from chris's email


BS:should be an is-a core - if you put a descriptor term in root then all subsequent terms will also need to be language. 


ct:do we want descriptor - instrument part is not a descriptor - not an is-a
if you choose descriptor will have it everywhere, suggest that use the world and not descriptor

ct:how resolve part then?

bs:need is-a  and part of as well - 

cs:adding descriptor was a way to get at this fundamental question - so we could reduce the structure and less likely to get to incompatible with OMs that want to use it.

bs:going down the wrong track, you want to build and ontology that will help other biologists, they want to know what info that is gathered via expts - they want to know what the words can be used to say - about eg devices etc

ct: if centrifuge - is an instrument descriptor -  don't need to add descriptor to it

bs:you can stop using the word descriptor at the top - keep it in mind if it helps

lf:instrument vs instrumentation
conceptual actual physical objects,

BS:use instrument not instrumentation

CT:technology descriptor - suggest domain and not technolgy - a better descriptor, assume thus sub tree is where we get the flags from

rw:yes, this is where we get a view into the ontology

hc:is this not technology type vs tech descriptor - 

ct:these should be bio domains not technology

tw:omics are  a conflated group

tw:do we care more re technology, e.g mass spec?

cs:the intent of this container is to flag by domain or by technology

ct:would like to flag mass spec e.g and the technologies

tw: what does proteomics mean? do we want each or domain or both

ct:technology does collapse into instrument

tw:ok, follows one of the early rules, if term is useful to multiple groups is common - what kind of terms see that will be tagged for proteomics ? 2d gel, mass spec etc?

ct:anything related to the study of proteins and peptides and their properties
not defined, these are flags add to terms, and reflects the colloquial usage

tw:would mass spec be a prot term - could you give me something more specific that would be tagged as proteomics two 2d gel analysis of plasma

tw:can you give me a discrete term?

ct:not clear what I am aiming at tech are not exclusive to proteomics

tw:I am trying to define the difference between proteomics and technology

lf: tech and seq are 2 different things - dna sequencing is a technique, a sequencer is an instrument

tw:I think we need these high level terms, proteomics and metabolomics don't mean anything

lf:we are not just putting concepts in trees - can also have part of and other relationship types, 

tw:i don't have problems with domain - we have used in our documents 

ss:still uneasy with having toxico genomics etc with proteomics  - if proteomics is a domain - there are relations between these concepts

lf:two sets of is-a bio domain and technology, we can use two trees

ct:where we say mass spec we can define this, is we say that something is an assay we can define that, but defining systems biology and has a proteomics technology


cs:ontolgy question - with containers - if we take away descriptors  - address things, data, processes, and disciplines, at least 4 parts we are addressing, bs is this  a problem, ?

bs:good way to do this, if you need to keep terms per discipline like proteomics maybe flat lists not necessary of equal standing as other trees.
data may be a problem, will get into cs when want to know what is relevant for your experiments  

cs:data types and not data itself, data is not instantiated in the ontology

bs:not all descriptors are of data, can use the term descriptors lower down in the mo - should be using when the term us a leaf term, not high up.

hp:agree with chris but not much mileage in starting here

ct:to be agnostic about the domains take the approach of the alien in a lab, to attack it at the what is there level, agrees with hp


AA:we agree that terms for domains are probably needed and therefore we should concentrate on the tangible and deal with this later.

CT:re classes, do they need sub dividing at the same level, should they have parts ? are these enough classes?

bs:if you do an anat ontology d2 1. organ - and various organs, heart lung, hear is a organ and get a tree and then get organ is an anatomical structure, organs have parts lobe is part of lung, a lobe is not an organ, gets a new parent organ part, neat way of doing this, get fma - part of and is a at the same time, 

could so the same with instruments, also need instrument parts, has all the kinds of instrument parts, with experiment will have many parts, and will need to list them.

ct:what did the fma do with parts?

lf:does anyone have fma?

hp:freely available version at u w.

tw:chris mentioned things processes etc, do you want to fit the 

materials instruments are things
protocols and investigation are processes
discipline would capture technology descriptions
datatype - include data and resources

ct:looking at the fma, spatial relations, is and part of - need to look at the is a part of

lf:what about the multiple parentage e.g. lung lobe vs liver lobe  - term is lobe of lung - these are precise
ct:can query what’s lobular - e.g lobular organ?

ss:spatial relationship, what about temporal relationship?

bs:temp relations can cause problems - get different type at different time, with experiments are temporally simple, not a life cycle or a cell differentiation.

accounting for time and relativity a has changed over period - not sure if there are concepts where things change over time

bs:if you have time need temporal relation - may need earlier than?

jf: i agree

ss:for tox need to know relative timeline of the study

ct:can do with a notion of time and events - data model - 

BS - GO lot of time, but no temporal relations, build what you are confident of and add other
relations later

CT - are there more things more complex than timepoints or time stamps that the ontology needs to capture?

HC - check with the Metabolomics community

CT - should FuGO have these concepts/model the concept of time, this sounds like concepts that would be captured by an object model

CS - we are talking about relations

CT - request to have RSBI think about time concept and whether this is needed, keep in mid that the data model will allow us to time stamp when things happen

CS - review the concepts that we the various communities have listed so far and see what relations are needed? is there a need for something more than is_a and part_of?

CT - check FMA, are three top level classes enough

TW - it is fine to start with only 3 top-level classes for now, if more are needed then that will become apparent as we progress through the ontology development

SS - there is a Metabolomics meeting next week, is it ok to present the discussions so far regarding this top-level structure?

TW - sure, the top-level structure of the ontology is still under development, but this is the work to date.

Assignment for the next developers call:
Begin to put the concepts (top50 list) into the existing trees that have been identified and review as to what kind of relations are necessary for these concepts

