OBI developers call - Nov. 7, 2007.
Attending: Gilberto F, Chris S, Daniel S, Melanie C, Helen P, Liju F, Bjoern P, Ryan B

1. Agenda for Workshop in Vancouver. 
see also https://wiki.cbil.upenn.edu/obiwiki/index.php/January_2008_Workshop_Agenda
a. General discussion  on roles. Raised by the Data Transformation branch but also of importance to other branches (as illustrated by the supernatant role email thread) is guidance on the usage of roles.
b. Branch reports. A one page report is requested from each branch highlighting issues. This should be circulated prior to the workshop but will be presented there. 
c. Revisit milestones. A chart of current milestones and where each branch stands will be generated ASAP (Ryan has volunteered to send a template). The chart will be used to identify where help might be given prior to the workshop, to determine what are current realistic goals,  and to plan new milestones.
d. Collaborative development tools. Daniel will present on one such tool from Protege. 
e. Parallel branch sessions. Face to face time is valuable not only for group discussions but also for resolving branch issues. Consider scheduling these based on the branch reports.
f. Polysemy. How common is this and how should this be handled. Also related is how to tie a community (alternative) term to a specific community (alternative term tag). Gilberto will follow up with others on this.  

2. Agendas for next developers calls.
a. Object hierarchy. Is this resolvable? Bjoern will coordinate find a Wed call where Frank, Matt, Alan, and he can attend to devote an hours discussion. If no resolution we will continue with current efforts and table this discussion.
b. Technical help. Centra will be used to guide use of svn and other technical issues for editors. Daniel will coordinate with Allyson and Melanie.

3. Data Transformation workshop. 
see https://wiki.cbil.upenn.edu/obiwiki/index.php/Data_transformation_workshop
The ongoing DT workshop has been very successful and has gone through card sorting,  addressed statistical issues, come up with new terms, use of meta data, use cases for evaluation strategy, and issues of polysemy.

4. Definitions for low level terms (e.g., brands of instruments). The Instrument branch has raised the issue whether it makes sense to provide Aristotelian terms for instance level classes such as a particular brand of instrument (e.g., LSRII cytometer). A related issue  on providing definitions came up in Data Transformation for basic math terms (e.g., sine). The cost of making exceptions to providing definitions is potentially high (undercuts the validity of the ontology) as so it is worth making the effort to provide these. To simplify definitions recommend including citation references to manufacturers documentation (for instrument models) or to standard textbooks (for math).
