TW - examine RSBI doc
TW - items identified from document: protocol, type of protocol
JF - multiple types of protocols, e.g. treatment intervention, observation protocol
TW - things done or observed at a high level, at what level would one define protocol?
RB - 
JF - concept of frequency, e.g. saw subject every day.  The first mage model, a new biomaterial is created with a new action, but believe it's the first entity.
TW - frequency, any definition
JF/RB - frequency, number of events per unit time, e.g. withold food for 12 hours
JF - an event is a time hook


RB - won't be domain specific
TW - will the protocol type, is this where the specificity come in?
JF - we have different types of care depending on the subject.  Concept of "disposition", can also collect samples w/o killing the animal.  Each protocol has a similar structure to it.  Was anesthetic used.  Observations made during the study have a frequency, e.g. weighed every day.
TW - have the concept of protocol type, some will be universal, some might be domain-specific
TW - another concept, time, universal.  Also actions.
JF - a protocol is a series of complex actions.
TW - trying to get list
JF - "event" (treatment event, observation), associate a "protocol" to an event.  then the concept of "group", replicas of subjects are collected in a group, subject another concept.  
JF - have experimental factors, groups in the resulting matrix, study design time (define the structure of the study, treatments are in parallel, and within this the experimental factors).  Other design types, block & crossover designs, kind of define the study timeline.
TW - indicates the "shape" of the timeline
JF - the design fators are utilized to display to the user, to organize thoughts
TW - exp factors, some universal and some domain-specific
TW - design types?
JF - fairly universal
TW - event types, study, universal
TW - set of actions, the actual step within a protocol
TW - characteristics of the biological material, sample
JF - belongs to the subject, 
TW - any characteristics that will be domain specific?  clinical history?
JF - count as observation
JF - have concept disease "stressor" if subject has e.g. clin history
TW - how are protocols modeled differently?
JF - try to model two different types of data collection, disrupt & non-disrupt the subject
CS - don't see this as being in conflict, maybe requires extensions to the domain.
TW - would observations be universal, or could some be specific


TW - investigation, study, universal, assay (u&d-s), measurement
CS - assay uni & dom-spec like observation
TW - measurement, uni, maybe dom-spec in some cases

TW - instruments, both uni & dom-spec
RB - agree

CS - propose to examine another domain
TB - agree, will try to get use cases up for snp arrays
RB - agree, can come up with some
TW - give 2 weeks for snp use case

Joseph White: Can someone point me to the RSBI cmap within the cmap tools app? I don't see it. I've been looking in 'Shared cmaps'. 






