Fugo Developers call, 01 March 2006.
-----------------------------

Helen P, Trish, Gilberto,Joe,Mervi Joe Wood, Tanya, Jennifer, Chris S, Liju, Helen C, Chris T, Susanna, Daniel, Tina

Missing Ryan.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Proposal in email, continue dev of terms in general areas

1. Joe sent mails re: ids and formats, renaming
2. General issues, this is a dev call, but need 5 mins to check in with people general focus by community. Proteomics have a pressing need, still true?
Chris T. worry that FUGO will take a while to stabilize, need something sooner.
Want rules and guidance on where things should go. Method for adding in new terms. PSI are in a hurry for something in April.

Chris likes Joe's terms better suggested in his mail.

Helen P. asks if Chris S, could post a full terms list.

AA:Chris T. will post ~ 300 MZ terms list and also the ontology under development by Monday 6th March
AA:Chris T. will post a link to the current public version too.

- coverage proteomics/mass spec areas.

Trish asks if the terms are binned or just a list, sounds like just a list.

Chris has issues on SW/data/algorithms as they stand in the ontology now.

Trish shares the version on centra.

AA:Trish will post the file that we discuss.

Data - input and output are roles on data Chris T. and Trish

Chris S. inputs and outputs data/samples/materials etc

Liju: do we have input/output roles?

Trish W: yes we have these as roles

Drop - input data was renamed to Data
output data was removed

Liju - did we have datum at one point, did we decide to replace with Data?

Trish:datum is a cardinal part of protocol

Helen P:is datum then redundant with what we have just generated

Joe, we had the term called value originally, this is still there.

We also have cardinal parts of value, e.g. unit already.

Liju InputRole and OutputRole  - are precisenames, rather than Input and Output

Chris s, we want to be consistent

Trish:when we name a term we need it be comprehensible outside the hierarchy.

HC:in defs need to add a comment why is _role, so that we track this

ChrisT  - we need to do this and also to have a general statement of policy

Chris: defs should be 'input role' - prev definition plus some context - for start and end of process.

HC:a definition and an example would be helpful.

AA:policy for defs: generic definition, an a is a b which c's. Plus example, if suffix terms are used within the names of terms then these should be explained in the definition while we are developing the ontology. These should be kept with the definitions for now.

Chris S. definitions could be used for reasoning, if we overload with human readable terms.

Liju:points out that we can do this with the heirarchy

GF:Follow up on what Chris S said about text defs, the defs are for people, not the computer, the formalisation should be done with properties and restrictions, etc. Computational defs are based on locations on heirarchy. 

Liju:there is sufficient and nec - we can put relations on these to do definitions. 



role definition: that part played by an entity within the context of a process

AA:need an output_role and input_role definitions

HP:AA for Trish could we get the tracker set up, and put these in as start items.

AA: Can Tim set up the digest, yes, need the tracker path. Weekly.

We were discussing why data and datum.

Chris S. I can imagine two types of data, parameter set as name value pair, plus something with columns definitions - 

Helen P: Barry said that we should not have plurals

Liju:sometimes there are exceptions

Chris s. will be confusing to have data and datum

Liju: I proposed DataSet

Joe:BioDataCube - need values per factors 

Proposal - rename Data -> DataSet - 

Helen C: are parameters - data

HP:parameter values could be data, not parameters

HC:we could be makig things more complex here

HP:what is a DataSet?

Chris S: Dataset has a Role.

Trish, Datum and DataSet are in two places in the heirarchy

There are process dependent things, and also independent entities.
Bottom line, we may not want to collapse into one now, we might need a lose definition of dataset

Chris S: a property of dataset, that datum doesn't have

Helen P:is datum a cardinal part of dataset

Helen C:when would we want to make a distinction between the dataset and datum

would we care if the parameter set is one number or many, if we have one work with is data 9 datum/dataset) are the situations where we can't describe.

Helen C, if we use the word data and don't have data/dataset/datum  - we could avoid this problem

Joe, we need to sort things like parameters

Chris S: we have these in different places.

HP:we need to resolve this sooner rather than later, we need to ask Barry
why these are in different places and how to resolve this proble,

AA: Trish to send a mail off to the list on this one








 










 













AA:Chris T. will post ~ 300 MZ terms list and also the ontology under development by Monday 6th March

AA:Chris T. will post a link to the current public version too - done by email



AA:policy for defs: generic definition, an a is a b which c's. Plus example, if suffix terms are used within the names of terms then these should be explained in the definition while we are developing the ontology. These should be kept with the definitions for now.

AA:need an output_role and input_role definitions

AA:Trish could we get the tracker set up, and put these in as start items.

AA:Can Tim set up the digest, yes, need the tracker path. Weekly.

AA: Trish/Chris to send a mail off to the list on the data issue
