FuGO Developers Conference Call Summary                                                            
March 22, 2005                                                                          
               

The group initiated the review of the circulated study term list.                       
Discussion reinforced the consensus reached earlier that the current                    
design of having investigation as a placeholder for separate studies is                 
good. It was expected that there would be few, if any, child terms of                   
investigation and that investigation details would be provided under                    
study. However, there were concerns about the division of study into two                
components, study_with_timeline and time-independent_study. Concerns                    
included whether the terms were mutually exclusive, naming of the terms                 
(study_with_timline/ study_without_timeline  and                                        
time-dependent_study/time-independent-study were proposed), and that                    
"time-independent-study" was a child of the term                                        
"unfolding_through_time". No conclusions were reached and the RSBI                      
community was solicited to provide some reasoning for this division and                 
structure. Similarly each community was asked to identify the location                  
in FuGO where the terms that their community has proposed are best                      
located in FuGO, i.e. fill-in column C in the circulated Excel file. In                 
addition, add definitions for classes (column D), note where new classes                
or re-arrangements of FuGO are needed (column E) and add the child terms                
that your community is interested in as needed, e.g. terms are listed in                
the file for BioMolecularAnnotation so that the location of each term                   
can be identified regardless of the fact that they all were once under                  
the subclass of BioMolecularAnnotation in the MGED Ontology. 