OBI Developers Call 2 May 2007
Present: Gilberto, Mervi, Allyson, Trish, Barry, Richard, Ryan, Daniel, Alan, Kevin, Chris, Tina, Liju, Philippe, Helen?
Minutes: Allyson

Agenda:
    * OBI Workshop in July, update by Mervi
    * Policy to collect relations - Liju and Relations branch editors
    * discussion of Richard's email on protocol application subtree (see email 4/27)

Notes:
+ Richard: His suggested protocol application subtree is as follows:
  I.      Protocol application (sibling of investigation)
	a.     Partition (data or material) 
		i.     Data Partition
			1.     Data filtering (e.g. FCM gate)
			2.     Data sampling (e.g. statistical sampling)
			3.  Clustering
		ii.     Material Partition
			1.     Enrichment or purification
			2.     Sampling (environmental sample)
	b.     Pool (no incubation period; no transformation occurs)
		i.     Material pool
		ii.     Data pool
	c.     Transformation (implies an incubation period)
		i.     Data transformation
			1.  Data summarization (would include distributional vales like mean, median, mode, SD, CV, etc.)
			2.  Normalization
		ii.     Material transformation
			1.     Material alteration by treatment (e.g. vaccination, stress, temperature, treatment compound)
			2.     Material alteration by spontaneous process (e.g. aging)
		iii.     Assay

+ Barry agrees with it mainly, but has 2 suggestions: 1. Some of the terms are ambiguous between occurrent and. Pooling should be used instead of pool, and Partitioning instead of Partition. 2. It's not clear to him that assay should be a transformation - may be a little "metaphorical". Instead, assay should be a "number 4".
+ Chris: How does material enrollment fit in? Richard: wanted to put it in, but sort of ran out of steam as he got towards the end. He still wanted it there to show people how he was thinking.
	+ Trish: examples are = enrollment of people in a study, or environmental sample. 
	+ Chris: It is an assignment of a role.
	+ Trish: Not Pooling, which is bringing together a group of objects.
	+ Should instead relate to sample population creation
	+ Richard: enrollment could be a Role Transformation, as a subclass of transformation
+ Chris: there is a term "Sample preparation for assay" (synonym is study). Another direct child of protocol application. Originally made for Susanna's community. Would need to be added into Richard's list. How does it fit into the new hierarchy?
	+ Allyson: should be dealt with on the branch call
+ Also not sure if data transformation has an incubation period = should not be included in the definition of Transformation
+ This will be discussed further in tomorrow's Protocol Application Telecon. Please email the PA branch list if you wish to join so we can count numbers


+ Liju wants more people to join the relations branch.
+ Branch editors should send in their relations to the relations branch
+ Barry: OWL can define relations very easily. This isn't necessarily according to OBO Foundry rules. Be very careful about adding new relations, and each new relations should be defined such that they can be submitted to the relation ontology
+ No-one disagrees with that, but do see 2 phases: collection phase (getting what each branch has in mind), and distillation / normalization.
+ Barry: Please apply the following criterion even at collection phase: relation should not contain terms in their names. E.g. there is "isPartOf", but do NOT make something like "isOrganPartOf". These will create two hierarchies: one within the Organ domain, and another within the relation domain. It is against "good practice"
+ Liju: I agree - relations and classes shouldn't mirror each other. The plan is to always look at the relation ontology first, and keep it in mind when adding to the OBI relations.
+ Alan: There is the general term "partOf". However, specific things will have a specific domain and range. So, even when we are collecting terms we MUST collect the domain and range that is expected for such relations.
+ Barry: in the long run, we will need axioms governing such constraints: domain-specific axioms are needed, though he's not sure domain-specific relations will be required.
+ Alan: domain and range do tend to be overused.
+ Liju will send out a file.
+ Barry: you should first put in definitions for your relations before you send out the file. There are about 20 relations in the relations ontology.
+ Trish: for our implementation, we need the owl version of relations ontology. 
	+ Barry: at the moment, it is a very simple FOL that is basically expressed in English. Definitions contain a reference to time, which OWL has a hard time dealing with. However, the relations don't contain this time dimension - just the definitions.
	
Mervi: update on workshop
+ Been in contact with organizer about booking a hotel. $149/night, but small hotel (74 rooms). The price is a lot lower than other places, so we should try this one. However, they need a rooming list asap. She'd like to send an email to the list today, and people would need a reply that they are interested. Later on, they will contact people individually to sort out dates. Do people know already if they will be at the meeting?
+ She spoke with Gilberto last week and talking about the draft agenda. There is an early draft, which will be put on the wiki.
+ Best airport to fly into is Ronald Reagan. BWI and Dulles are also alright.
+ Is there money available for travel for the event? Chris still has some funds available for this, please contact him.	
