OBI- coordinator call Oct. 10, 2007.
Attending: Daniel S, Allyson L, Gilberto F, Jennifer F, Bjoern P, Ryan B, Liju F, Tina B, Alan R, Chris S

1. Polymorphism community
Tina has left PharmGKB and therefore no longer able to represent the polymorphism community. She has identified Michelle Carrillo (at PharmGKB) who has done some work with Daniel Rubin and ontologies as her replacement. (Thank you, Tina!) Tina will send email to the OBI-Coordinators list introducing her.
2. Pediatric Clinical Outcome community?
Tina's new position at the Stanford Hospital involves creating a central repository for clinical outcomes that will need standardized descriptions especially of data analysis. Although initially focused on Stanford data, the goal is to connect to 5 national pediatric hospitals (e.g., Children's Hospital of Philadelphia) thereby potentially representing a larger community than Stanford alone. The question came up as to whether the current OCI (Ontology for Clinical Investigations) community would cover their needs. It was decided that Tina should join efforts with OCI to start with and we can address whether an additional community is warranted in the future. 
 3. Grant support for OBI
NIH has released a program announcement for "Data Ontologies for Biomedical Research" (PAR-07-425). Alan will attend an information meeting on this program that will take place Oct. 18. He will report back for the next Coordinators Call. Initial plans are for him and Ryan to spearhead the grant. A letter of intent is due Dec. 18 for submission Jan 18 with a start date of December 2008.
4. Core developers. 
Core developers are developers key to the evolution of the ontology and are decided on an ad hoc basis by the Coordination Committee (section 1.2.1.2 from the OBI-GroupRegs_v0.2.doc). Core developers as part of the Coordination Committee are invited to join the coordinators monthly calls. Allyson and Alan are core developers. (Daniel may be as well but he is also a Community Cooridnator). Melanie Courtot in Ryan Brinkman's group will be devoting her time to OBI and working with Allyson, Alan, and Daniel on technical and administrative support for OBI. Melanie was voted to become a core developer. 
5. OBI January workshop.
Ryan has set up a block of rooms with Holiday Inn across the street from the meeting venue at a reduced rate.
