Coordinators call.  15 August 2007

Chris Stoeckert, Allyson Lister, Jennifer Fostel, Daniel Schober, 
Ryan Brinkman, Susanna-Assunta Sansone, Bjorn Peters, 
Gilberto Francesco, Frank Gibson, Alan Ruttenberg, Matthew Pocock

SOURCE FORGE STATIC OBI PAGE
Allyson:  page is being updated with logo 
in progress; php files
will put up temporarily for comment on Science COmmons prior to committing

instructions to update will be in file 
who are authors? not advisors
how to add supporting groups (e.g our day jobs)
e-mail suggestions to allyson
documents license?  question for later agenda

OBO FOUNDRY NAMING CONVENTIONS SURVEY
Daniel: standardization of naming conventions from OBO Foundry groups is underway
invitation to comment / call / fill in questionnaire
short time frame for response.  need a volunteer
Daniel will send around the questions with suggested answers, derived from our conventions

ISMB POSTER
Frank: not time sensitive
deferred

OBJECT HIERARCHY
CS: video is terrific, as is hierarchy
AR:  send to / request review: alan rector and robert stevens and pierre renault(??)
and send to advisors
need to clarify relations
Frank will e-mail these reviewers and cc dev
add to wiki / sourceforce

countables assembled from countables; also from portions?
can there be instances of portions; are all instances countables? 
example:  three test tubes of 10 ml water = three portions of water 
example: wash with water
portion turns a mass into a count; need a better term

("Frank portion" "portionable")
water is a portionable; instance = portion of water, which is countable
at some point this will fail at atom / very large numbers
we do not try to fit all granularities

("barry portion" of mass) = mass description; eg class water vs class portion of water
does this imply that we need to add "portion of" to everything (handle with synonyms)

OWL file is on SVN; Frank will send the link

CS: try assemblage and portion as major divisions (replace countable)
draw a line on this portion of discussion :-)

BB:  definition of divide
design with intent is a different axis of classification
(eg instrument, device)  do this with relations.

other questions to consider:
lot and material type
vender reagents

next week call -- CS not available; initiated on Centra?  
from EBI (paid, domestic call)?  Susanna not available either
TBD off line
 


