Hi Allyson,
Can you post these?
Thanks,
Chris

Sept. 12, 2007 Coordinators call:
Attending: Chris S., Ryan B., Mervi H., Gilberto F., Liju F., Susanna S., Bjoern P.,  Alan R., Philippe R-S.

1. Weekly conference call platform. Issue is the use of the MGED number is expensive ($1000 month) to MGED and a more cost-effective platform should be found. Susanna has looked in the EBI conferencing but that has both a charge to EBI and to the callers so is not a good solution. Possible good solutions are:
a. Use the W3C conferencing platform if it is free to us. Alan will look into this.
b. Use the voice feature of  Centra that NCICB has set up for us. Gilberto will set up a test.
Alternate solutions to be investigated if the above don't work out are: 
c. the use of the Vancouver conferencing system but that will mean each person calling in will have to pay for their call (not an issue if they can call from work without personal cost).
d. skype cast but would need to set up an account.

2. Letter of support for MGED grant. A competitive renewal will be submitted to NIH from members of MGED (including Chris S.) that includes an aim involving OBI. A draft of the aim was circulated to the coord. list. It was agreed that Chris would draft a letter of support to be signed by Ryan (as a coordinator) on behalf of the OBI consortium. OBI advisors will also be solicited for letters. 

3. New OBI community: Alan put forward a new community for OBI representing researchers working on stem cells. He circulated a description of that stem cell community to the coord. list. The community is about 30 stem cell research labs at Harvard with interests in semantic web type activity to link them and cover protocols, antibodies and other experimental reagents, cell lines, genes, and model organisms. There was definite interest in having them participate  but some questions were raised. What is the relation of the Harvard stem cell community to the larger community (e.g., the ISSCR; it was noted that a Harvard stem cell researcher Len Zon  has been active in that society). OBI needs developers as well as coordinators and we would like to know whether someone could help in that regard. Would they be willing to attend the workshop in Vancouver to get up to speed on our activities? Alan will convey back our interest and questions and continue to work with them. 

4.  Mailing lists: An issue has been raised with Sourceforge mailing lists in that they are not indexed by Google and therefore not searchable by through Google which is a common way for others (and us) to find discussion on relevant topics. Alan has proposed moving to Google Groups and will provide a mail describing how he would proceed to set up a test of using this mechanism. The email proposal will be open for comments for 2 weeks before he acts on it. The use of Google groups also allows us to revisit the question of the number of mailing lists that should be maintained. 