MGED ontology call
------------------

Hinxton will be the conference venue. There is no onsite accommodation, so we'll need to stay in Cambridge.

There will be transport to/from Cambridge provided. Either the bus or the EBI people carrier.

Philippe will provide a costing for catering and no catering. There is a canteen on site.

Agenda for the conf will be done by email.

Study.

CS: We look at using study properties and OBO relationship types. has_participant as a limiting definition for us.

We should be careful about adding fugo properties without reference to the OBO reln ontology

JW:so can't use time or array as a factor as one occurent one continuant

CS:depends, any term or type can be cast in multiple ways. Time is a process, a time measurement is not a process.

LF:can we use sub properties, can these be reasoned on?

TW:would need to ask Chris Mungall or Barry

LF:has_participant reln, we don't want to subvert the original meaning

Bjorn:As long as the sub properties are true is-a it should be ok

CS:if look at has_agent is a specialization of has_participant

TW:these qus need to be answered on the list, direct to BS and Chris Mungall. What would be the class to apply the property to, study design or study? Study is a process and study design is a continuant.

JW:should be attached to study design, as design is description of what are going to do.

HP:agree with Joe.

We agree that we need this to be property of study factor

LF:we need the domain and range, - is study design the only class that will use this property. Sometimes we won't know till we have more classes in the ontology - for now we can assign OWL thing. And refine later. Discussion started with study design factor, study design does have a factor

TW:we are trying to figure out if where factor belongs.

LF:study design is one of the classes in the domain.

TW:we agree that the property should at least be attached to study design

We do need to work on the domain and range.

HP:we need biomaterial classes before we can do that.

TW:we now need to decide on reln type. Also things that are known factors - 

 


